---
share: "true"
path: docs/dm-philosophy.md
---
# **DM Philosophy**

My primary job as the DM is to ensure everyone at the table has a fun, engaging, and interesting experience. However the DM also acts as a deity, judge, interpreter, and story guide.

## DM Style

> "How do you enforce your rules?"
> ***"Very carefully!"***
> **― Overheard at a drunken DM gathering**

As a DM my style for running games includes: 

- **DM Preferences** - I prefer story over mechanics, the mechanics are there as tie breakers and to generate consistency. I prefer people have fun playing their characters and not get hung up on rules and rolls. The rules are important to make sure we are all on the same page, but they are guides not oath pacts. I will typically follow the "rule of cool" and allow flexibility as long as ALL the players are having fun.
- **Preparation vs. Improvisation** - I have a serious case of OCD as this document reveals. While I do a substantial amount of game preparation, its more around developing alternatives and contingency plans than structured content. I prefer to prepare the tools and then improvise with those tools as the players move through the story. When preparing, I have a lot of "what ifs?" and options and potentials. Improvisation is an essential DM attribute, but it's a lot easier if you have your tools to do so. I'm not above making spot rulings in order to keep the game moving and minimize looking up content, but that depends on the situation. I may revisit offline to make sure I'm right or generate a house rule.  
- **Pre-Made Content & Stock vs. Homebrew** - I'm a worldbuilder by nature. I don't think I've played "off-the-shelf" content in decades. I do not use "pre-made" content for the most part. I do use stock spells, magic items, and such. No point in starting from scratch, But I have been known to invent stuff to tell a story. Part of the fun for gaming for me is to build the world and then set the players loose in it to "do as they will" and react to them. As such, for settings I'm almost 100% homebrew. As far as rules and other content are concerned, game balance comes into play there so house rules or homebrew content must be carefully considered before it's allowed, but I'm not opposed to having that discussion. But be careful what you wish for, I've been known to have fun with player suggested homebrew stuff.  
- **Game Balance & Fairness** - Rule number one is always fun. Game balance is important, but not at the expense of that. I do make an attempt to balance enemies against the party's current strength, but it should always be a ***little*** bit more challenging than players would like. Otherwise they wouldn't feel like they've accomplished anything. I will control the encounter experiences though to ensure players won't just march off to their death. At least, not at first... :)
- **DM & Player** - I frown on DMs treating their NPCs as "just another player" and investing heavily in their pseudo-PC. I feel it robs from the focus of the campaign as a whole and diminishes effort put into the larger NPC investment. The DM should always have a horizontal view across the campaign, not the inherently vertical view of personally investing in one particular super-NPC. Further, this can cause issues with roleplaying the inside knowledge the DM inherently has about the campaign. Not all DMs can separate this well.
- **Sidebars** - I will periodically pull players aside in individual or small groups to deal with activities that may not be to the general awareness of the rest of the party. This is not intentional exclusion from the game, it is more about secret knowledge and giving players agency to control what they know that others may not. As well, I fully support players requesting sidebars, either through voicing the need or passing a note to the DM. However, we must remember that others are also there to play. I try to limit DM-initiated sidebars to a minimum and make them short and sweet, and if players are repeatedly asking for them that will be dealt with as well. It can become disruptive if not managed.
- **Dice Rolls** - Typically I roll my dice behind the screen. I rely on dice rolls as a fairness mechanic, but sometime the "rule of cool" may come into play or require on the fly rebalancing of the situation through a tad bit of fudging. I ***have*** been known to roll dice unnecessarily (I know, evil of me) or even worse use a dice roller on my computer so there's no evidence of a roll. Players shouldn't always have any idea if something is actually happening they need to be worried about. I have also been known to pull dice rolls out in front of the screen for dramatic purposes. I do expect players to be fair with their dice rolls, but I'm not overly fond of policing them. Trust is important here. If it starts to become a major issue, there will be sidebar discussions.
- **Pet Peeves** - I have very few pet peeves, I'm a fairly flexible and open DM. Rules lawyering can get on my nerves, but we'll discuss that in later sections. Please realize, if I take a hard stance on something, its usually because I have the best interests of the party and campaign at heart. It's all about fun.

## Campaign Tone & Style

- **Campaign Tone & Narrative** - We will be playing a traditional D&D heroic high fantasy campaign. There will be lots of opportunity for hack and slash, as well as role playing. This will not be a political manipulation campaign, a gritty realistic campaign, nor a light-hearted silly campaign (although a sense of humor may be helpful in dark times). This will be good old fashion monster hunting and dungeon crawling. PCs may die, but fun is the goal.
- **Encounter Balance** - We are shooting for a blend of exploration, combat, and social encounters. There will be opportunities to tell stories, play characters and just beat up creatures. The encounters should be fairly well balanced to allow the players to be victorious, but there will be effort involved. I will not be trying for a Total Player Kill. I hate that.
- **Voices & Acting** - I have been known to do voices for NPCs if the mood strikes or ham it up a bit. That does not mean its an expectation for the players. If players choose to get into character by doing voices or engaging in a little light acting, more power to them. Respect their choice and play along regardless of skill level. Practice makes perfect. If players DO NOT want to do voices or acting, that's perfectly fine as well.
- **Murder Hobos** - Blindly just killing everything in sight, while perfectly allowed, is not advised. I subscribe to the "rule of consequences". Kill that city guard just because you think no one is looking? You might find a city "investigator" hot on your tail. It would serve players well to remember that alignments exist for a reason, to provide a moral and ethical guide for how the players should behave. I expect players to play as their characters would react in "real world" situations. We will NOT be playing evil characters, so don't act that way. Killing monsters who are out for your blood? Have at it.
- **Type of Game** - I run campaigns in a blend of a non-linear, sandbox style of play. There is a pre-planned loosely defined story, but it is allowed to flex and shift in response to player action. I do not like railroading players. Instead, as stated previously I prefer to prepare a general story arc, a key set of encounters, characters and tools, and allow the players to do as they will. I will rely on my improvisational ability to deal with the outcomes of player action. Will I prod characters in a certain direction? Of course, we are trying to tell a collective story here. But I do it through motivation and rewards, not hard walls and boundaries. But remember the "rule of consequences", be careful the direction you as the players choose to take the game. After all, that's where the fun is.

## DM Rule Authority

- **Rule Approach** - I take the "DM is god" approach to rules. However, I'm a kind and benevolent god, and as such I do ***kinda*** agree to play by a stock set of agreed upon rules. I think they call them rulebooks? These books are not a bible, though, and if it serves the purpose of the story and fun, or if it interferes with game balance, I do feel free to make a house rule or on-the-fly ruling and include/exclude stuff. Generally speaking I'm a "RAI" (rules as intended) versus a "RAW" (rules as written) DM, but I more consider myself a "RAF" (rules as fun) DM. I have a tendency to take a "rules favor the player" approach, meaning if there is a ruling that is not clear during in game, the rules favor the player until then. There are some mechanics that need extensive reading, tits best to research on a ruling after the game in order to not disrupt gameplay and have no lingering disputes.
- **Rules Debates** - I will allow ***some*** quick player input into rules debates. I'm not perfect, and may need to understand the pros and cons before a ruling is made. However, in the spirit of keeping the game moving I will not engage in lengthy debates and arguments. Once I've made my ruling, we move on. If necessary, I will research more later and entertain out-of-session discussions for house rule revisions. Mistakes happen, especially unfamiliar complex game systems, but it’s usually better to have fun than deliberate over the rules.
- **Rules Lawyers** - I do NOT have a lot of tolerance for in-session "rules lawyers". Constantly arguing the rules disrupts gameplay and impacts the fun had by all. If you know the rules, make your case, accept the decision of the DM and move on. I reserve the right of final judgement.
	- **DO NOT** continue to argue mid-session.
	- **DO NOT** complain about the situation during the game.

## Player Expectations

- **Player Agency** - I'm a strong believer in player agency, or the right of the player to steer their own story. I do not like to "take control" of PCs if something happens to them that would warrant them behaving differently that normal, I will typically go a couple of different directions. If it's some sort of condition that the player is dealing with (think lycanthropy or vampirism), I may provide a "black out" sidebar where the player doesn't know what happened. I will provide role-playing opportunities to correct the condition or if the player prefers allow them to work it into their character. It's all about story telling opportunities. I would prefer the player voluntarily take up a role playing situation, but if they don't want to we will work out a solution. It may take a few game sessions though. Think of it as an extended "encounter". This will be discussed more in  the game mechanics section below in some specific cases.
- **Player Narrative Authority** - I encourage the players to help flesh out the world. While I do pull together the campaign framework, part of the fun I get to have is building the world together with the party. I find it fleshes out the setting and provides variety. If you have character concepts or backgrounds that are outside the norm, feel free to raise them. I will typically rule on allowing them based on game balance and story reasons. Got your own deity you want to worship? We'll talk. Have a background as a member of a pirate crew? Let's discuss. As long as it doesn't violate the other guidance (alignment, etc.) laid out here, I'm fairly flexible towards creativity. This can go a LONG way towards connecting the players to the game setting.
- **Character Party Fit** - "Loner" characters have a tendency to be a challenge for the DM. This is a PC "party" after all. Quiet and brooding like Strider? Go for it. But it is a social game. Don't character concept yourself into a box that goes against that direction. You won't have any fun and it may impact the rest of the party. There will be social components to gameplay. I will encourage you to create a character that plays well with others and fits into the party. This does not mean I approve of other players bullying you into playing specific species or classes you don't want to play. Far from it, player choice is part of player agency. But it's not a puzzle where every character has their place.
- **Player Playstyle** -  Does every player at your table need to be there for the same reasons as ever other player? Is it ok that
	- Tim is only here for the sweet loots & XP
	- Mary-Sue is here to role-play her snow-flake
	- Ann is just here to 'kill stuff'
	- Steve has brought a completely min/maxed PC to the table
	- Billy, he is here just to hang out with is friends & have pizza
	I am fine with players having different motivations to play, I just expect them to respect that others may not enjoy their playstyle and allow the game to breath for all. We will have a discussion on why are you here and what you hope to get out of the game. As the DM, I will be trying to meet those hopes & expectations. If for some reason, I can not meet those expectations, I will offer what I can do instead and see if that's sufficient. We are all here to have fun, but many may have different ideas of what fun is.
- **Spotlight Sharing & Focus** - Character spotlights can be difficult to manage. While they are a natural part of storytelling, it's all about balance. I have a tendency to keep the spotlight shining on the party as a whole, and allow certain characters to take center stage in short term bursts. I also like to rotate so everyone gets a turn in the spotlight. It will usually be short term. Some players love roleplaying their characters and naturally assume the spotlight role. Others, the quiet types, not so much. It doesn't mean the opportunity won't be offered to everyone though. One thing I do frown on is when we are focused on one or a few characters, others shouldn't step in and "steal the spotlight". Let them have their fun too. Sometimes I focus on the shy ones to pull them into the game, and they may not feel comfortable if they are trampled out of that.
- **Meta-Knowledge** - Some players like to memorize the rule book or lore. That's great and helpful. Does this mean your character knows all that too? Absolutely not. Should a character know that that trolls don't regenerate health when harmed with acid or fire? Maybe, if it is in their background or experience. This external knowledge extends to failed rolls as well. Just because the wizard knows the thief rolled low to check for traps, it makes no sense for the wizard to check as well. When in doubt, ask the DM if your character knows something or can participate in some activity. Typically I'll let the dice decide, but if it doesn't make sense I may say no. Some meta-knowledge is ok as long as it doesn't violate the "rule of cool". It's not a cardinal sin. But it does break immersion and players should be mindful. Note that meta-knowledge can be somewhat mitigated by not using stock content, so we're all good there.
- **Player Absences** - Life is hard, and being a gamer in life even harder. Not everyone can make every game session. I don't like penalizing people for that. At the same time, players dropping in and out of games can make continuity and story flow difficult. I don't like coming up with artificial reasons to constantly move characters in and out of the party. If its a planned extended absence, that may make sense. Otherwise, a "blue dot" zombie house rule that has been used by my gaming groups for years is much more manageable. If a player has a short term absence, for the duration that character is still a member and travels with the party. However they have a virtual blue dot on their forehead and a glazed look in their eyes as if they had too many mushrooms the night before. They will not participate in spotlights or combat. I will not play their character. In rare occasions when that character fulfills a particular role in the group (healer for example) I may perform that activity but only with the prior permission of the owning player, so plan accordingly. No one player should be able to hold progressing the game hostage (i.e. if you're gone we still play without you and your character is invalid until you return). If we have too many absent players, I may either cancel the session or shift gears into a "mini-session" for those who can make it. These mini-sessions may focus on downtime activities or one-shot scenes that are standalone but may be useful to progress the story. There is a penalty for missing the game, however, as you will miss out on all the lovely experience and rewards the players will obtain. Miss too much, and you'll fall behind the other players in capability. Think of that as encouragement to show up.
- **New Players Joining** -  Fact of life, players will drop out and new players will have to join to keep the fun rolling. We've all seen it. If a new player joins the game in progress, I will typically start them out at the approximate level of the rest of the party. I will either onboard them with a personal Session Zero if time allows or at a minimum quickly review the Code of Conduct with them and allow them to catch up offline. I expect the party to be welcoming and not make rolling in a new player to the party an onerous task. Please don't "take an instant dislike" to the newbie and harass them in character. Help the party find a reason to be inclusive and bring everyone together.
- **Player Information** - I expect the players to manage their own inventories and record keeping. Don't make a habit of relying on the DM to remind you of what you have and where you put it. I've got enough to remember in my own head. Get in the habit of taking notes. Inform the DM if you level up or make changes to your character that may affect gameplay. I may periodically ask the players for their current hit points, AC, Perception etc. for DM record keeping. Have that information handy and available.
- **Unprompted Dice Rolls** - Some players like to fidget with their dice. That's ok. But it doesn't constitute a formal roll. If a player is sitting there making dice rolls without saying anything, only then to say, "I just rolled a nat-20 on my perception check!" that will be frowned upon. Dice rolls will typically be prompted by the DM, or at a minimum player initiated activity should be announced before rolling.
- **Player Opposed Dice Rolls** - Dice rolls can be used to settle in-character arguments only if both players agree. The bard can roll to persuade the fighter that his course of action is right, but only if the fighter's player agrees to the roll. It should be used sparingly, and only under the DMs guidance or when prompted by the DM. Otherwise, some players may take such actions against their characters personally.
- **PC Vs PC** - I have historically allowed PC on PC combat to occur, and it has not always ended well. Tension between characters is fine, but I would expect party member to make some level of attempt to get along. It shouldn't be allowed to escalate to full on violence unless ***everyone*** at the table agrees. I would really frown on players killing other players. At a minimum, there will be in-game consequences, but egregious killing may lead to a conversation with the player. Player agency is important to me, on ***both*** sides.
- **Secrecy** - Players are allowed to keep in-game secrets from other players. That's part of what sidebars are for, to limit knowledge exposure. I will typically leave it up to the player to decide for their character who should be "in the loop". There is the potential for drama there, but remember the player killing rules.
- **Food & Drink** - Believe it or not, this can be a touchy subject. We will likely not be playing in our own homes, at least at first. We will need to be mindful of our host's rules on food and drinks. I have been known in the past to give special rewards (like inspiration) for those that do bring snacks. There is no expectation that someone do so, however. Also, be mindful that some players may have sensory problems (I do, especially with smells), dietary restrictions (I do, limited menu), or food allergies (I don't but others might). It never hurts to ask in advance and be careful and considerate with what you bring. And don't get offended if players don't want to partake.
