---
share: "true"
path: docs
title: Game Rules & Mechanics
---
Back to [Home](https://steven-stanford.github.io/sundered-scales-campaign/index)

# Game Rules & Mechanics

Wherein we establish the game edition plus any optional, house, or homebrew rules that will guide the mechanics of the game. Unless otherwise specified below or ruled on by the DM in play, the standard game mechanics from the core rules can be assumed. For specialty content (ex. Tasha's Cauldron of Everything or Xanathar's Guide to Everything), please consult with the DM before using.

## Game Edition & Sourcebooks

- **Edition** - We will be using D&D 5th Edition 2014 version.
- **Compatibility** - If players want to adapt materials from D&D 5.5E (2024) or Pathfinder, please consult with the DM.
- **Sourcebooks** - Players should refer to the core Players Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and Monster Manual rulebooks. Any other materials will be brought in on an "as needed/DM ruling" basis.

## General Mechanics & Optional / House Rules

How are general game mechanics going to be interpreted? Are there any optional rules or house rules that the group will be using?

### Initiative & Surprise

- **Initiative Frequency** - We will be rolling initiative using the standard method, once at the start of combat. Rounds for the duration of combat will all proceed with the same initiative sequence until the DM indicates combat has ended or players/creatures do not take any combat actions for an entire round. We will not be using the ***Side Initiative (DMG, p.270)*** or ***Speed Factor (DMG, p.270)*** or the legacy Greyhawk initiative options.
- **Enemy Group Initiative (House Rule)** - The DM will roll group initiatives for enemies by type. Significant enemies, such as a mob boss or large creature, will roll initiative separately.
- **Initiative Ties (House Rule)** - Tied DM or PC initiatives will be broken by an additional d20 roll for the ties only.
- **Surprise (PHB, p. 189)** - It is possible for PCs, NPCs and enemies to "get the drop" on someone they are attacking for the first time. Missed perception rolls, invisibility, hiding, or unexpected actions can all create a surprise situation. ***The DM determines who might be surprised.*** If neither side tries to be stealthy or have special conditions, they automatically notice each other. To notice hiding characters, the DM compares the ***Dexterity (Stealth)*** checks of anyone hiding with the passive ***Wisdom (Perception)*** score of each creature on the opposing side. Any character or monster that doesn’t notice a threat is surprised at the start of the encounter and can’t move or take an action on the first turn of combat, and can’t take a reaction until that turn ends. Additional, if the target can't see the attacker (hiding, invisibility, etc.) the attacker has advantage on attack rolls against it. A member of a group can be surprised even if the other members aren’t.

### Actions & Reactions

On your turn in a round, you may take one action and move a distance up to your speed. You can break up the movement into before and after the action. Some class features, spells, or abilities allow characters to take more than one action in a turn or a "bonus action", usually of a specific type (ex. Two-Weapon Fighting, the rogue Cunning Action feature, etc.). In addition to the standard ***Attack***, ***Cast Spell***, ***Dash***, ***Disengage***, ***Dodge***, ***Help***, ***Hide***, ***Ready***, ***Search***, and ***Use Object*** actions ***(PHB, p. 192-193)***, some clarification is warranted in how these action work and other optional action types.

- **Free Communication Action (PHB, p. 190)** - Communication doesn't consume either your normal action or your move. You can communicate briefly however you are able, through  utterances and gestures, when you take your turn. This means if you notice an enemy and someone else does not, you cannot shout and warn them if the enemy acts before you in the round. No exposition is allowed, that may be deemed to consume your standard action.
- **Free Object Action (PHB, p. 190)** - You can do a simple interaction with ***one and only one*** object or feature of the environment for free, during either your move or your action. If you want to interact with a second object, you need to use your action. Some magic items and other special objects always require an action to use, as stated in their descriptions. The DM might require you to use an action for any of these activities when it needs special care or when it presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, you could reasonably expect to use an action to open a stuck door or expend effort turning a crank to lower a drawbridge.
- **Bonus Actions (PHB, p. 189)** - You can take a bonus action only when a special ability, spell, or other feature of the game states that you can do something as a bonus action. The wording of how a bonus action is triggered is important. If it is not triggered or enabled, you otherwise don’t have a bonus action to take. You can take only one bonus action on your turn, so if you have bonus action options you must choose. You can choose when to take a bonus action during your turn, unless the bonus action’s timing is specified, and anything that deprives you of your ability to take actions also prevents you from taking a bonus action. 
- **Ready Action (PHB, p. 193)** - This one confuses people so it warrants extra attention. If you want to get the jump on a foe or wait for a particular circumstance before you act, you take the ***Ready*** action on your turn so that you can act later in the round using your reaction. First, you decide what perceivable circumstance will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose the action you will take in response to that trigger, or you choose to move up to your speed in response to it. When the trigger occurs, you can either take your reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore the trigger and lose your action. If the trigger ***does not*** occur, you lose your action. You cannot change your readied action or trigger until your turn in the next round of play and you can take only one reaction per round. Bonus actions cannot be readied or reactions because they must be taken on your own turn. Some class features (like ***War Magic***) allow bonus actions after certain conditions, but these cannot be readied.
- **Ready Spell (PHB, p. 193)** - As above, when you ready a spell, you cast it as normal on your turn but hold its energy, which you release with your reaction when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must have a casting time of only 1 action, and holding onto the spell’s magic requires concentration. If your concentration is broken, the spell dissipates without taking effect.
- **Tying & Untying (PHB, p. 196, XGtE, p. 78 Option)** - A character can use an action to tie up or untie a creature, such as in grappling or capturing scenarios. The creature who ties the knot makes an ***Intelligence (Sleight of Hand)*** check when doing so. The total of the check becomes the DC for an attempt to untie the knot with an ***Intelligence (Sleight of Hand)*** check or to slip out of it with a ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check. This rule intentionally links Sleight of Hand with Intelligence, rather than Dexterity. This is an example of how to apply the rule in the "Variant: Skills with Different Abilities" section in chapter 7 of the Player's Handbook.
- **Climbing on a Bigger Creature (DMG, p. 271)** - Rules for allowing a Small or Medium creature to climb onto a Huge or larger creature. This involves a contested ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check. A creature on a bigger creature gains advantage on attack rolls against it.
- **Disarm (DMG, p. 271)** - Attempt to disarm a foe by making an attack roll contested by the defender's ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check. If successful, the defender drops one held item at their feet.
- **Overrun (DMG, p. 271)** - A creature can try to move through a hostile creature's space by making a ***Strength (Athletics)*** check contested by the hostile creature's ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check.
- **Shove (PHB, p. 195)** - Using the ***Attack*** action, you can make a special melee attack to shove a creature, either to knock it prone or push it away from you. We will also be using the optional ***Shove Aside (DMG, p. 271)*** rule which uses the same mechanic but pushes to the side instead. If you’re able to make multiple attacks with the ***Attack*** action, this attack replaces one of them. The target of your shove must be no more than one size larger than you, and it must be within your reach. You make a ***Strength (Athletics)*** check contested by the target’s ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check (the target chooses the ability to use). If you win the contest, you either knock the target prone, push it 5 feet straight away from you, or push it 5 feet to either side. The player should state which one they are trying to execute before rolling.
- **Grappling (PHB, p. 195)** - To grab a creature or wrestle with it, you take an ***Attack*** action to make a special ***Grapple*** melee attack. If you’re able to make multiple attacks with the ***Attack*** action, this attack replaces one of them. The target of your grapple must be no more than one size larger than you, and it must be within your reach. Using at least one free hand, you try to seize the target by making a grapple check, a ***Strength (Athletics)*** check contested by the target’s ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check (the target chooses the ability to use). If you succeed, the target has the ***grappled condition***.
	- A grappled creature’s speed becomes 0, and it can't benefit from any bonus to its speed. When you move, you can drag or carry the grappled creature with you, but your speed is halved, unless the creature is two or more sizes smaller than you.
	- The condition ends if the grappler is ***incapacitated***. The condition also ends if an effect removes the grappled creature from the reach of the grappler or grappling effect. You can release the target whenever you like (no action required).
	- A grappled creature can use its action to try to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a ***Strength (Athletics)*** or ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check contested by your ***Strength (Athletics)*** check.
- **Tumble (DMG, p. 271)** - A PC or creature can attempt to tumble through a hostile creature's space by making a ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check contested by the hostile creature's ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check.
- **Two-Weapon Fighter Style (PHB, p. 72)** - When you take the ***Attack*** action and attack with a light melee weapon that you’re holding in one hand, you can use a bonus action to attack with a different light melee weapon that you’re holding in the other hand. If either weapon has the thrown property, you can throw the weapon, instead of making a melee attack with it. Normally you don’t add your ability modifier to the damage of the bonus attack, unless that modifier is negative ***(PHB, p. 195)***. However, if the character has the Two-Weapon Fighter Style they can apply their modifier to the damage of their off-hand weapon when fighting with two weapons.

### Dice Rolls, Ability Checks, Crits & Damage

- **Difficulty Class (DC) (PHB, p. 174 w/ House Rule)** - Usually I will keep DC targets for ability checks public, especially if the success or failure of the roll is obvious ("yes, you hit the troll!"). The exception to this is where the roll is about perceiving, detecting, influencing or discovering something wherein the success or failure is ***not*** obvious ("you think you may have persuaded the shop owner to give you a deal"). In those cases, I will ask the player to make the roll and report their result and will compare it against a confidential DC target. The amount of success or failure is therefore not player knowledge, maintaining the mystery. The result of the ability check, influenced by the success or failure and how much of a success will influence how I describe the result to the player.
- **Everyone Wants To Roll (House Rule)** - Typically I will allow all players the opportunity to roll for accomplishing something, leading to multiple rolls on the same thing like finding a hidden door or detecting a hiding creature. This can slow down gameplay a bit, but I feel players should be able to exercise their abilities. The exception to this is wherein the ability success or failure can have an impact on the next attempt. For example, the character may be trying to persuade a shop keeper to give them a better deal and possibly fails, leading to the next character to want to "give it a try". For each successive attempt, I will increase the DC target due to the shop keeper "getting annoyed" with the pestering players. In these types of cases, I will let players know up front before rolling that repeated rolls will get harder. In these cases, players should work together and decide who is going make the actual check. Other players may take the Help action to support what the primary player does instead. This is part of the reason it's important to communicate your desired roll before doing it. We will not be using the ***Group Checks Option*** (PHB, p. 174).
- **Multiple Attempts & Taking 20 (House Rule)** - In a similar vein, if the same PC is making an attempt over and over to accomplish something like picking a lock until successful, I will allow multiple rolls to be made. Again, the DC will increase with each successive attempt reflecting the character's increasing frustration. If the DC reaches max I will let the character know they "just aren't getting it" and call a halt to further attempts. However, if the character takes a one hour short rest (perhaps reflecting on what they are doing wrong) I will reset the DC and they can try again. Other circumstances like Bardic Inspiration assistance can also reset the DC at DM's prerogative. In relaxed and simple situations wherein the character can take plenty of time and care, I may also allow a skilled character to "take a 20" instead of making repeated attempts. Note this is not a "real 20" and therefore no critical success is possible.
- **Called Shots** - Called shots are not allowed except in rare game specific circumstances, wherein a DM determined penalty may be applied.
- **Natural 20s, Critical Success, & Critical Hits (House Rule)** - Rolling a natural 20 (distinguished from a _modified 20_, which is a total result of 20 with modifiers) on an ability check, save or or attack will always be considered a critical success, regardless of any modifiers or the target’s AC.
	- **Ability Check / Saving Throw** - A critical success on an ability check or saving throw always succeeds, no matter the circumstances. I will usually resolve the roll in some impressive way that won't necessarily impact the game mechanics but may affect the story.
	- **Attack Roll (House Rule)** - A critical success on an attack ***may*** be a critical hit. A second attack roll (often referred to as "backing the crit") must be made against only the target's AC to confirm the critical hit. If this is successful, the attack is a critical hit and deals double base damage. Critical hits multiply the weapon's base damage dice (e.g., ×2, ×3, or ×4 depending on the weapon). However, extra damage dice (like Sneak Attack) are ***not*** multiplied. Some weapons and character options allow critical hits to be threatened on more numbers, or to deal more than double damage. Note that this increased threat range (say 19-20) is treated as if it were a 20 for mechanics purposes. 
	- If it Nat-20 on an ability check/save means what? What does it mean to the narrative? Do rolling a Nat-20 allow a player to get what they are after, no matter the circumstances or the ridiculousness of the roll? Would such a roll be immediately apparent in the narrative, or would it go perhaps unnoticed?
	- **Impossible Crits** - Impossible crits will not be allowed, instead they may mitigate the penalties for failure (convincing king to give up kingdom doesn't get you thrown in jail, king is amused).
- **Critical Fail** - Rolling a natural 1 on an ability check, save or or attack will always be considered a critical failure, regardless of any modifiers or the target’s AC. I will usually resolve the roll in some negative way that doesn't impact game mechanics, but may be spectacular or impact the story. I do not use a critical fumble table.
- **Cleaving Through Creatures (DMG, p. 272 Option)** -: If a melee attack reduces an undamaged creature to 0 hit points, any excess damage carries over to another undamaged creature within reach that was also within the original attack's reach. The original attack roll must have been high enough to hit the second creature.
- **Skills with Different Abilities (PHB, p. 175, DMG, p. 263 Options)** - This rule allows for different ability scores to be used with skills if the situation warrants it (e.g., using ***Strength (Intimidation)*** instead of ***Charisma (Intimidation)***). This will usually be defined by an rule option or house rule, but may also be left to DM choice.

### Advantage, Disadvantage, & Attacks of Opportunity

- **Advantage/Disadvantage (PHB, p. 7)** - A character may gain ***Advantage*** (rolling two dice and taking the higher result) or ***Disadvantage*** (rolling two dice and taking the lower result) on certain checks, attacks, or saving throws. The DM can choose to introduce further situations or reframe rules for Advantage/Disadvantage. Advantage/Disadvantage does not stack and you cannot earn more than one additional die.
- **Help Action** - When you take the Help action, the creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability check it makes to perform the task you are helping with, provided that it makes the check before the start of your next turn. You can also aid a friendly creature in attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. You feint, distract the target, or in some other way team up to make your ally’s attack more effective. If your ally attacks the target before your next turn, the first attack roll is made with advantage.
- **Long Ranged Attacks** - Your attack roll has disadvantage when your target is beyond normal range, and you can’t attack a target beyond the long range.
- **Ranged Attacks in Close Combat** - When you make a ranged attack with a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have disadvantage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet of a hostile creature who can see you and who isn’t incapacitated.
- **Flank Positioning (DMG, p. 251)** - To flank an enemy, two allies must be adjacent to it and positioned directly across from each other. Flanking grants advantage on melee attack rolls. You *must* be able to see the enemy. You *cannot* flank while *incapacitated*. Larger creatures can flank as long as at least one square or hex of their space qualifies.
- **Crawling & Climbing (PHB, p. 182)** - Crawling or climbing may impose disadvantage on certain types of movement or actions, making it more dangerous for players to move through difficult terrain.
- **Attacks of Opportunity (PHB, p. 195 w/ House Rule)** - In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies to drop their guard. You can rarely move heedlessly past your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing so provokes an opportunity attack. You can make an opportunity attack when a hostile creature that you can see moves out of your reach. To make the opportunity attack, you use your reaction, ***thus consuming/replacing your next action in this round or the next***, to make one melee attack against the provoking creature. The attack interrupts the provoking creature’s movement, occurring right before the creature leaves your reach. You can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by taking the Disengage action. You also don’t provoke an opportunity attack when you teleport or when someone or something moves you without using your movement, action, or reaction. For example, you don’t provoke an opportunity attack if an explosion hurls you out of a foe’s reach or if gravity causes you to fall past an enemy. ***As a house rule, opportunity attacks never incur advantage.***

### Inspiration

- **Gaining Inspiration (PHB, p. 126 Option)** - I use inspiration to encourage role playing and reward you for playing your character in a way that’s true to his or her alignment, personality traits, ideals, bonds, or flaws. Players will be given a specialized "inspiration token" to track that they have available inspiration to spend. You either have inspiration or you don’t—you can’t stockpile multiple “inspirations” for later use. This token can carry over from session to session until consumed. Typically, I will award it when you play out your personality traits, give in to the drawbacks presented by a flaw or bond, and otherwise portray your character in a compelling way that is true to your character.
- **Spending Inspiration** - If you have inspiration, you can expend it when you make an attack roll, saving throw, or ability check. Spending your inspiration gives you advantage on that roll. Additionally, if you have inspiration, you can reward another player for good roleplaying, clever thinking, or simply doing something exciting in the game. When another player character does something that really contributes to the story in a fun and interesting way, you can give up your inspiration to that character if they don't already have inspiration themselves. Please note, this does not operate the same way as ***Bardic Inspiration***, which uses a specific mechanic (add a d6 to a die roll in the next 10 minutes). They can be combined, though. ***The player must declare the use of inspiration prior to rolling any dice.***
- **Snacks** - I do not award inspiration for bringing food. It's a game mechanic, people, not a bribe! Although...I'm not saying the DM can't be bribed!

### Movement

Movement can include jumping, climbing, swimming, and crawling. These different modes of movement can be combined with walking, or they can constitute your entire move. However you’re moving, you deduct the distance of each part of your move from your speed until it is used up or until you are done moving.

- **Difficult Terrain (PHB, p. 182)** - Moving through difficult terrain (dense forest, rubble, steep slopes, slippery) costs one extra foot of movement for each foot moved. Thus to move through a 5 ft. square of difficult terrain consumes 10 ft. of movement, effectively moving at half speed.
- **Crawling (PHB, p. 191)** - While prone, a character can crawl, with each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain).
- **Climbing (PHB, p. 182 w/ Options)** - While climbing, each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain), unless a creature has a climbing speed. Climbing a slippery vertical surface, or a vertical surface with few handholds requires a successful ***Strength (Athletics)*** check with the DC set by the DM in addition to the extra movement cost, with failure indicating slipping or falling. So, climbing a 5 ft. square of an icy mountain side not only costs 15 ft. of movement (one third normal speed) but the risk of falling due to a failed ***Strength (Athletics)*** check. The DM may still elect for the ***Strength (Athletics)*** check even if the creature has a climbing speed in exceptionally rough terrain.
- **Swimming (PHB, p. 182 w/ Options)** - While swimming, each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain), unless a creature has a swimming speed. Gaining any distance swimming in rough water or strong currents requires a successful ***Strength (Athletics)*** check with the DC set by the DM in addition to the extra movement cost. So, swimming a 5 ft. square in rough ocean waters not only costs 15 ft. of movement (one third normal speed) but the movement may be lost due to a failed ***Strength (Athletics)*** check. The DM may still elect for the ***Strength (Athletics)*** check even if the creature has a swimming speed in exceptionally rough terrain.
- **Long Jump (PHB, p. 182 w/ Options)** - When you make a long jump, you cover a number of feet up to your ***Strength*** score if you move at least 10 feet on foot immediately before the jump. When you make a standing long jump, you can leap only half that distance. Each foot you clear on the jump costs a foot of movement. To clear a low obstacle (no taller than a quarter of the jump’s distance) you must succeed on a DC 10 ***Strength (Athletics)*** check. When you land in difficult terrain, you must succeed on a DC 10 ***Dexterity (Acrobatics)*** check to land on your feet. Otherwise, you land prone.
- **High Jump (PHB, p. 182 w/ Options)** - When you make a high jump, you leap into the air a number of feet equal to 3 + your ***Strength*** modifier if you move at least 10 feet on foot immediately before the jump. When you make a standing high jump, you can jump only half that distance. Each foot you clear on the jump costs a foot of movement. The DM might allow you to make a ***Strength (Athletics)*** check to jump higher than you normally can. You can extend your arms half your height above yourself during the jump. Thus, you can reach above you a distance equal to the height of the jump plus 1 1/2 times your height.
- **Different Speeds (PHB, p. 190)** - If a creature has more than one movement type or activity and switches between them, the distance moved in the prior movement is deducted from the movement of the new movement type. For example, if you have a speed of 30 and a flying speed of 60 because a wizard cast the fly spell on you, you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 feet, and then leap into the air to fly 30 feet more.

### Perception Checks

- **Active Perception (PHB, p. 174)** - If you are actively searching or checking for something, you will be asked to make a ***Wisdom (Perception)*** skill check. If you have proficiency in ***Wisdom (Perception)***, you can add your proficiency bonus in ***Wisdom*** to that roll. Without proficiency in the skill, you makes a normal ability check without the bonus. ***You will most likely not know the target number you are rolling against.*** Success or failure will be reflected in the described result. In rare cases where the the check is done without player knowledge, the DM will perform this roll secretly.
- **Passive Perception (PHB, p. 175)** - A passive perception check doesn’t involve any die rolls. This represent the average result of automatic awareness, such as noticing things or detecting hidden things. It is referred to as a score. For example, if a 1st-level character has a ***Wisdom*** of 15 and proficiency in ***Perception***, they has a passive ***Wisdom (Perception)*** score of 14. Here’s how to determine a character’s total for a passive check:
  *10 + all modifiers that normally apply to the check. If the character has advantage on the check, add 5. For disadvantage, subtract 5.* 

### Hiding, Sneaking, & Visibility

- **Unseen Attackers & Targets (PHB, p. 194)** - In addition to the surprise rules, when you attack a target that you can’t see, you have disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true whether you’re guessing the target’s location or you’re targeting a creature you can hear but not see, or the target is completely behind cover and not attacking. If the target isn’t in the location you targeted, you automatically miss, but the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not whether you guessed the target’s location correctly. When a creature can’t see you, you have advantage on attack rolls against it. If you are hidden—both unseen and unheard—when you make an attack, you give away your location when the attack hits or misses.
- **Hidden/Hide Action** - When you try to hide, make a ***Dexterity (Stealth)*** check. Until you are discovered or you stop hiding, that check’s total is contested by the ***Wisdom (Perception)*** check of any creature that actively searches for signs of your presence. You can’t hide from a creature that can see you, and if you make noise (such as shouting a warning or knocking over a vase), you give away your position. An invisible creature can’t be seen, so it can always try to hide. Signs of its passage might still be noticed, however, and it still has to stay quiet. In combat, most creatures stay alert for signs of danger all around, so if you come out of hiding and approach a creature, it usually sees you. However, under certain circumstances, the DM might allow you to stay hidden (see Stealth below) as you approach a creature that is distracted, allowing you to gain advantage on an attack before you are seen. When you hide, there’s a chance someone will notice you even if they aren't searching. To determine whether such a creature notices you, the DM compares your ***Dexterity (Stealth)*** check with that creature’s passive ***Wisdom (Perception)*** score with modifiers (see above).
- **Stealth** - Make a ***Dexterity (Stealth)*** check when you attempt to conceal yourself from enemies, slink past guards, slip away without being noticed, or sneak up on someone without being seen or heard. At DM discretion, there are times that sneaking past someone is flat out impossible. Stealth can be accomplished in combat if the creature is already hidden.
- **Obscured** - A given area might be lightly or heavily obscured. In a ***lightly obscured*** area, such as dim light, patchy fog, or moderate foliage, creatures have disadvantage on ***Wisdom (Perception)*** checks or attack actions that rely on sight. A ***heavily obscured*** area—such as darkness, opaque fog, or dense foliage—blocks vision entirely. A creature in a heavily obscured area effectively suffers from the ***Blinded*** condition. The presence or absence of light in an environment creates three categories of illumination: bright light, dim light, and darkness.
- **Bright Light** - Normal daylight, firelight, lanterns, and torchlight all qualify as bright light, with no penalties incurred.
- **Dim Light** - An area of dim light is usually a boundary between a source of bright light, such as a torch, and surrounding darkness. The soft light of twilight and dawn also counts as dim light. A particularly brilliant full moon might bathe the land in dim light. Sight based actions are at disadvantage.
- **Darkness** - Characters face darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit nights), within the confines of an unlit dungeon or a subterranean vault, or in an area of magical darkness. Sight based actions are impossible without some form of unnatural or magical vision (see Darkvision or Truesight).
- **Darkvision (House Rule)** - Many creatures, especially those that dwell underground, have darkvision. Within a specified range, a creature with darkvision can see in complete darkness as if the darkness were dim light, so areas of darkness are only lightly obscured as far as that creature is concerned. In areas of dim light, they can see as if in bright light (house rule). However, the creature can’t discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
- **Invisibility (House Rule)** - An invisible creature is impossible to see without the aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose of hiding only, the creature is ***heavily obscured*** but may be still attacked. The creature’s location can be detected by any noise it makes or any tracks it leaves on a successful ***Wisdom (Perception)*** check (house rule, no advantage/disadvantage). Attack rolls against the creature even if detected have disadvantage, and the creature’s attack rolls have advantage.
- **Truesight (House Rule)** - A creature with truesight can, out to a specific range, see in normal and magical darkness as if in bright light (house rule), see invisible creatures and objects, automatically detect visual illusions and succeed on saving throws against them, and perceives the original form of a shapechanger or a creature that is transformed by magic. Furthermore, the creature can see into the Ethereal Plane.

### Conditions

Unless otherwise identified as exceptions elsewhere in these house rules, all normal condition rules from **Appendix A (PHB, p. 290)** should be the standard.

### Backgrounds & Tools Proficiency

- **Background Proficiency (DMG, p. 264 Option):** Characters can add their proficiency bonus to any ability check where their background would reasonably apply.
- **Tool Proficiencies (DMG, p. 239, XGtE, p. 78 Option)** - We will be using the expanded tool use mechanics. Skill and tool proficiencies allow addition of BOTH modifiers to the check if tools could reasonably be used. Having both the skill and tool proficiency confers advantage to any check, and the quality of the toolset may confer an additional modifier to the check beyond the proficiency bonus.

### Environmental Damage

- **Falling (PHB, p. 183, House Rule)** - At the end of a fall, a creature takes 1d6 bludgeoning damage for every 10 feet it fell, to a maximum of 20d6. A Dexterity save will remove up to 20 feet of the damage taken (house rule). The creature lands prone, unless it avoids taking damage from the fall. A flying creature in flight falls if it is knocked prone, if its speed is reduced to 0 feet, or if it otherwise loses the ability to move, unless it can hover or it is being held aloft by magic, such as the fly spell.
- **On Fire/Lava Damage (DMG, p. 249)** - I will be using the Improvised Damage table for these environmental effects. Note this does not override normal fire effect damage from spells or abilities which list their damage.
- **Suffocation / Drowning (PHB, p. 183)** - A creature can hold its breath for a number of minutes equal to 1 + its Constitution modifier (minimum of 30 seconds). When a creature runs out of breath, it can survive for a number of rounds equal to its Constitution modifier (minimum 1 round). At the start of its next turn, it drops to 0 hit points and is dying.

### Encumbrance

I am not normally a stickler for encumbrance tracking. If I think characters are carrying too much, I will simply rule as such, so no carrying a metric ton of treasure. If characters elect to stay encumbered, they will suffer movement penalties and attacks at disadvantage. As long as players take reasonable precautions, no penalties should be applied.

### Death, Resurrection, Resting

- **Dropping To Zero (PHB, p. 197)** - When you drop to 0 hit points, you either die outright or fall unconscious, as explained in the following sections. Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage reduces you to 0 hit points and there is damage remaining, ***you die if the remaining damage equals or exceeds your hit point maximum***. If damage reduces you to 0 hit points and fails to kill you, you fall unconscious. This unconsciousness ends if you regain any hit points. We will not be using "coup de grace" style rules, creatures allowed death saves will always make use of them, however additional damage is uncontested and easily made lethal.
- **Death Saving Throws (PHB, p. 197)** - Whenever you start your turn with 0 hit points, you must make a death saving throw. Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed. Otherwise, you fail. On your third success, you become stable (see below). On your third failure, you die.
	- The successes and failures don't need to be consecutive; keep track of both until you collect three of a kind.
	- The number of both is reset to zero when you regain any hit points or become stable (see below).
	- If you rolling a critical fail on a death save, it counts as two fails.
	- If you roll a critical success, you regain 1 hit point.
	- If you take any damage while you have 0 hit points, add a failure (2 failures if a critical hit).
	- If additional damage equals or exceeds your hit point maximum, you suffer instant death.
- **Stabilizing (PHB, p. 197, House Rule)** - The best way to save someone with 0 hit points is to heal it. If healing is unavailable, the creature can at least be stabilized so that it isn’t killed by a failed death saving throw. A character can use their action to administer first aid to an unconscious creature and attempt to stabilize it with a successful DC 10 ***Wisdom (Medicine)*** check. ***Use of a healer's kit confers normal advantages and bonuses, based on kit quality (house rule).*** A stable creature doesn’t make death saving throws, even though it has 0 hit points, but it does remain unconscious. The creature stops being stable, and must start making death saving throws again, if it takes any additional damage. A stable creature that isn’t healed regains 1 hit point after 1d4 hours.
- **Monsters & Death (PHB, p. 198)** - Most monsters die when they drop to zero hit points, rather than falling unconscious and making death saves. There may be exceptions to this in the case of bosses and special NPCs, or if the story warrants it, at the DM's discretion. If a player drops them to zero with a melee attack and DOESN'T want to kill them, they have the option to knock them out instead.
- **Campaign Death** - In a high magic world, even death is never really permanent. There may be options available to resurrect players, if desired. I will usually leave it up to the player to decide if they want to pursue that option, however if that is the case they may be "out of the action" for a bit. They will always have the option of rolling up a new character. ***I try REALLY hard to avoid Total Player Kill (TPK) situations***, but this can also be dependent on how smart the players are and don't do something stupid like fighting against overwhelming odds. Running is always an option.
- **Resurrection / Raise Dead** - Resurrection, while uncommon, does exist both in religious and necromantic contexts. It's not simply a thing of "popping down to the resurrection shop" and will require magic, favors, effort, or flat out gold. The player being revived always has the option of choosing not to come back. We will use stock spells as written for character-conducted revivals.

### Rest & Healing

- **Resting (PHB, p. 186, House Rule)** - Characters need rest - time to sleep and eat, tend their wounds, refresh their minds and spirits for spellcasting, and brace themselves for further adventure. Adventurers can take short rests in the midst of an adventuring day and a long rest to end the day.
	- **Short Rest** - A short rest is a period of downtime, at least 1 hour long, during which a character does nothing more strenuous than eating, drinking, reading, and tending to wounds. A character can spend one or more Hit Dice at the end of a short rest, up to the character’s maximum number of Hit Dice, which is equal to the character's level. For each Hit Die, the player rolls and adds the character’s Constitution modifier to it and regains hit points equal to the total. The player can decide to spend an additional Hit Die after each roll. A character regains some spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest, as explained below. ***Medical attention using a DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check and the use a healer's kit during this time frame can add additional hit point recovery based on the success level (house rule).***
	- **Long Rest (XGtE, p. 77 Option)** - A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8 hours long, during which a character sleeps or performs light activity (reading, talking, eating, or standing watch for no more than 2 hours). If the rest is interrupted by a period of strenuous activity (at least 1 hour walking, any fighting or casting spells, or similar adventuring activity) the characters must begin the rest again to gain any benefit from it. At the end of a long rest, a character regains all lost hit points. The character also regains spent Hit Dice, up to a number of dice equal to half of the character’s total. A character can’t benefit from more than one long rest in a 24-hour period, and a character must have at least 1 hit point at the start of the rest to gain its benefits. ***A Long Rest always starts with a Short rest, and will count as one if interrupted (house rule).***
- **Exhaustion (PHB, p. 291)** - Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as lack of sleep, starvation and the long-term effects of freezing or scorching temperatures, can lead to an ***Exhaustion*** special condition. Exhaustion is measured in six levels. An effect can give a creature one or more levels of exhaustion, as specified in the effect’s description. If an already exhausted creature suffers another effect that causes exhaustion, its current level of exhaustion increases by the amount specified in the effect’s description. A creature suffers the effect of its current level of exhaustion as well as all lower levels. An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its level as specified in the effect’s description, with all exhaustion effects ending if a creature’s exhaustion level is reduced below 1. Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion level by 1, provided that the creature has also ingested some food and drink.

| Level | Effect                                         |
| ----- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| 1     | Disadvantage on ability checks                 |
| 2     | Speed halved                                   |
| 3     | Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws |
| 4     | Hit point maximum halved                       |
| 5     | Speed reduced to 0                             |
| 6     | Death                                          |
- **Sleep (XGtE, p. 77 Option)** - Not all creatures need to sleep, but those that do usually have a "sleep equivalent" that is treated as such. A creature that is naturally sleeping, as opposed to being in a magically or chemically induced sleep, wakes up if it takes any damage or if someone else uses an action to shake or slap the creature awake. A sudden loud noise (yelling, thunder, or a ringing bell) also awakens someone that is sleeping naturally. Whispers don't disturb sleep, unless a sleeper's passive ***Wisdom (Perception)*** score is 20 or higher and the whispers are within 10 feet of the sleeper. Speech at a normal volume awakens a sleeper if the environment is otherwise silent (no wind, bird song, crickets, street sounds, or the like) and the sleeper has a passive ***Wisdom (Perception)*** score of 15 or higher. Whenever you end a 24-hour period without finishing a long rest, you must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or suffer one level of exhaustion. It becomes harder to fight off exhaustion if you stay awake for multiple days. After the first 24 hours, the DC increases by 5 for each consecutive 24-hour period without a long rest. The DC resets to 10 when you finish a long rest. When you finish a long rest during which you slept in medium or heavy armor, you regain only one quarter of your spent Hit Dice (minimum of one die), and the rest doesn't reduce your exhaustion level. 
- **Healing Surge (DMG, p. 266 Option)** - During its turn, a creature can use a bonus action to spend one and only one Hit Die to regain hit points.
- **Injuries (DMG, p. 272 Option & House Rule)** - This introduces lasting physical consequences for receiving a critical hit or failing a death save by 5 or more (house rule). At the player's choice, the DM will roll on the "Lingering Injuries" table and ***cancel the extra damage or failure***. The table provides various injuries with different effects that ***may*** remain even when magically healed or over time. ***Please note, these debilitating effects may not be permanent in a high-magic world.***

### NPCs & Deities

I view vendors, information brokers, sponsors and patrons as "role-playing opportunities" and do not put fixed mechanics in place regarding their interaction. Is that vendor overcharging you? That's for you to figure out and haggle. Want your patrons help with something? Stay on his good side. Proper role-play will be rewarded.

- **Renown/Piety (DMG, p. 22 Option)** - We will be using the optional Renown & Piety systems to track how much influence a character has with and organization or, if religious, their relation to their deity. This will have role-playing impact on interactions (DM judgement) and in the case of clerics may impact spell availability. Don't get on your deity's bad side.
- **"I Know A Guy" (House Rule)** - Once per campaign, when the party faces a particular problem, a player can declare "I know a guy...". We will use specific tokens to indicate if a player has used this house rule, which must be given up once used. The player then quickly provides a brief description of this NPC and their relationship to the character. This should be concise, focusing on _how_ they know them and _why_ they might be able to help. The DM then takes this newly created NPC and integrates them into the world. The DM determines the NPC's personality, exact location, and whether they are genuinely willing or able to help (and at what cost or with what strings attached).

### Magic, Spells & Spell Effects

- **Spell Casting, Material Components & Juggling (House Rule)** - I do not find it necessary to micromanage magic users casting spells. I do not require them to keep track of which hand they hold components in and which one they do somatic gestures. I do not take inventory of spell components. As long as players make a token effort to "replenish supplies" (stop off at the magic shop and spend gold) I will leave that up to the players. The exception to this is expensive (> 1 gp) spell components, which must be bought or found and tracked if consumed. As well, if a spellcaster is tied up or gagged this will limit somatic and verbal casting. I reserve the right to adjust or expand this house rule, as well.
- **Spell Identification (XGtE, p. 85)** - A character can use their reaction to identify a spell as it's being cast, or they can use an action on their turn to identify a spell by its effect after it is cast. If the character perceived the casting, the spell's effect, or both, the character can make an ***Intelligence (Arcana)*** check with the reaction or action. The DC equals 15 + the spell's level. If the spell is cast as a class spell and the character is a member of that class, the check is made with advantage. Some spells aren't associated with any class when they're cast, such as when a monster uses its Innate Spellcasting trait. This ***Intelligence (Arcana)*** check represents the fact that identifying a spell requires a quick mind and familiarity with the theory and practice of casting. This is true even for a character whose spellcasting ability is Wisdom or Charisma. Being able to cast spells doesn't by itself make you adept at deducing exactly what others are doing when they cast their spells.
- **Spell Abuse (House Rule)** - I encourage players to be "inventive" with spell use. However, if something becomes "game breaking", I reserve the right to put limits in place if the invention starts becoming abusive.
- **Spells Vs. Environments (House Rule)** - Spells are magical effects and are assumed to work in "adverse" environments (fire or lightning spells underwater for example). However, targets of said spells may gain resistance to the spell effect that may mitigate damage or alter the effect (fire resistance underwater in the previous case, or wild lightning underwater). Judgement calls may be made, as well.
- **Familiars** - Familiars act independently of you but will obey your commands. They do have their own agency, though. Familiars cannot attack in combat, but do roll their own initiative (I allow players to do this) and act on their own turn. Unless otherwise specified, familiars operate as described in the ***Find Familiar*** spell.
- **Additional & Tweaked Spells** - We will be sticking to spells and descriptions from the PHB, DMG, Tasha's Cauldron, and Xanathar's Guide. Unearthed Arcana is right out. I do not encourage designing "homebrew" or "tweaked" spells, as these can be game breaking. If something else comes up, I will make a ruling.
- **Religious Magic (House Rule)** - As previously stated, we will be using the Renown/Piety system to determine a character's relationship with their deity. All "religious" spellcasters have their spells granted by the deity, and at their displeasure can be revoked. As a DM, players will be given ample opportunity to "correct their ways", or even given the option to shift allegiances to another more appropriate deity. This may affect their spell availability, however, so approach this with caution.
- **Wishes (House Rule)** - If wishes are used to recreate spell effects, these work as described by the spell with no stress mechanic. If characters "go beyond" spell effects, DM interpretation and judgement will come into play and the wish may go awry. Beyond the default stress mechanic (1d10 necrotic damage, 33% chance of losing _Wish_), there are a couple of house rules to apply here.
	- **Player Intent (House Rule)** - When a player casts _Wish_ for an effect beyond duplicating another spell, they must clearly state their _intent_ behind the wish, in addition to the exact wording. The DM's primary goal is to fulfill the _intent_ as closely as possible, rather than maliciously twisting the words. It shifts the dynamic from a battle of wits between player and DM to a collaborative storytelling exercise. Players feel safer using the spell creatively, knowing the DM won't purposefully ruin their character or the campaign. Too powerful wishes can still go "wrong", however, so I wouldn't recommend wishing to become a god or anything like that.
	- **Consequences, Not Twists (House Rule)** - If a wish goes "wrong," the negative outcomes are generally _consequences_ of the wish's success, not malicious twists of the wording. These consequences are proportional to the magnitude of the wish and provide new adventure hooks. This keeps the game moving forward and provides new challenges, rather than simply punishing the player. (Ex. wishing for unlimited gold crashes the economy).
	- **DM Foreshadowing/Guidance (House Rule)** - If a player is about to make a _Wish_ that the DM knows will have severe, game-altering consequences, the DM will offer a subtle in-character warning (e.g., a flash of insight, a sense of dread, a whisper from a god, or an NPC sage advising caution). The DM might even offer a chance to rephrase or reconsider. This respects player agency while preventing accidental campaign destruction. It also makes the DM feel less like an adversary and more like a facilitator.
	- **Warlock Limited Wishes (House Rule)** - For the Genie Warlock's "Limited Wish," the "effect of one spell that is 6th level or lower" means the _effect_ of that spell, _not_ that the Warlock casts the spell themselves. This prevents unintended interactions (like applying metamagic to the "wished" spell). Also, reinforce that it still has the 1d4 day recharge.

### Magic Items & Potions

- **Magic Item Rarity (DMG, p. 135)** - We will be using the standard magic item rarity chart (common, uncommon, rare, very rare, legendary) to classify magic items and their availability / worth.
- **Item Use & Attunement (DMG, p. 136)** - Some magic items require a creature to attune with them before their magical properties can be used. This will be stated in their description. Without becoming attuned to an item that requires attunement, a creature gains only its nonmagical benefits (a magical shield is still a shield), unless its description states otherwise. 
  
  Attuning to an item requires a creature to spend a short rest focused on only that item while being in physical contact with it (this can't be the same short rest used to learn the item's properties). This focus can take the form of weapon practice (for a weapon), meditation (for a wondrous item), or some other appropriate activity. If the short rest is interrupted, the attunement attempt fails. Otherwise, at the end of the short rest, the creature gains an intuitive understanding of how to activate any magical properties of the item, including any necessary command words. A creature can also voluntarily end attunement by spending another short rest focused on the item, unless the item is cursed.
  
  An item can be attuned to only one creature at a time, and a creature can be attuned to no more than three magic items at a time. Any attempt to attune to a fourth item fails; the creature must end its attunement to an item first. Additionally, a creature can't attune to more than one copy of an item. Certain items can also have prerequisites.
  
	- If the prerequisite is a class, a creature must be a member of that class to attune to the item. If the class is a spellcasting class, a monster qualifies if it has spell slots and uses that class's spell list.
	- If the prerequisite is to be a spellcaster, a creature qualifies if it can cast at least one spell using its traits or features, not using a magic item or the like.  
	- A creature's attunement to an item ends if the creature no longer satisfies the prerequisites for attunement, if the item has been more than 100 feet away for at least 24 hours, if the creature dies, or if another creature attunes to the item.

- **Attunement Vs. Identify (House Rule)** - Attunement will normally reveal everything about an item, but characters can identify items to find out what they do before attunement. Characters do not HAVE to identify an item, but this runes the risk of a cursed item sneaking in the front door. Additionally, we will not be allowing "identification through resting", the ***Identify*** spell must be used to delve the item.
- **Homebrew Magic Items (House Rule)** - I find that homebrew magic items add a certain flavor to the game play. At DM discretion, "non-standard" magic items may be found or discovered, or in rare cases purchased. Characteristics of these items are determined when identified or attuned. I may draw from other sources (internet, Unearthed Arcana, Sword Coast) for these items, or they may be tweaked. I do not enable players to homebrew magic items, though.
- **Buying & Selling Magic Items** – Typically, only common or uncommon magic items will be available for direct purchase in magic shops, anything higher will have to be found, taken, or made. In rare cases a "diamond in the rough" can be found, but buyer beware.
- **Mixing Potions (DMG, p. 140 Option)** - It is not generally advisable to take more than one potion at a time unless that potion has no duration and take immediate (healing potions for example). Taking on more than one timed potion effect will be rolled on the "Potion Miscibility" table, and can have severely adverse effects.
- **Scroll Mishaps (DMG, p. 140 Option)** - A creature who tries and fails to cast a spell from a spell scroll must make a DC 10 ***Intelligence*** save. If the save fails, the DM will roll on the "Scroll Mishap" table.
- **Wand Recharge (DMG, p. 141 Option)** - Some wands may not auto-magically recharge and once used they are dead. This will be determined by the description of the magic item as discovered by identification or attunement.
- **Cursed Items (House Rule)** - Cursed magic items do exist, and normally take effect upon attunement (although in rare cases it can be activated by simply "handling" the item). The curse may or may not be able to be broken by a ***Remove Curse*** spell at DM's discretion, or may require additional activity to resolve. I will typically use this as a "roleplaying opportunity" and not to punish players, as that is a "player agency" concern.
- **Magic Resize (House Rule)** - Wearable magic items of a certain rarity will normally auto-magically resize to fit their wearer once attuned. If an item is not attunable, it's not resizable. Typically this kind of "open ended" resizing will only occur with rare or above magic items. Common or uncommon magic items will normally be "fixed purpose".

### Player Agency Mechanics

As previously stated, I'm a strong believer in player agency, and I will typically go a couple of different directions. The following are house rules for how I plan to deal with various player agency mechanic issues.

- **Spell/Cure Availability** - It's a very good possibility that religious institutions will provide correcting for the following conditions as a service. It may require a "donation", however.
- **Possession (House Rule)** - Possession will normally use the "black out" sidebar approach, but the option may be offered to the player to role-play the possession. There will always be some way to exorcise or end the possession (ex. ***Dispel Evil***).
- **Lycanthropy (House Rule)** - Lycanthropy will always use the "black out" sidebar approach to balance the benefits. Lycanthropy is considered a curse, and can be removed by the ***Remove Curse*** spell. Players can "choose" to become a were, but recall the lack of control alongside the benefits.
- **Vampirism/Undead (House Rule)** - Becoming undead will always be a role-playing opportunity. However, players may have to periodically make ***Charisma*** saves to avoid their worst inclinations (drinking blood, violent reactions, etc.). Being undead is not considered a curse and ***Remove Curse*** will not cure it. ***Resurrection*** or some other form of religious revival may work, however, at the DM's discretion. Players can choose to become intelligent undead (vampires or liches), but remember the negatives.
- **Stat Changers (House Rule)** - Stat changing effects (Intellect Devourers, etc.) are always temporary and can be magically healed. They will not heal naturally, however, so players may have to seek help to fully recover.
- **Petrification (House Rule)** - Petrification (Medusas, Basilisks) is always temporary and can be removed. It is not easy though. Additionally, we will be using the following house rules for petrification effects:
	- **Phased Petrification (House Rule)** - Instead of instant petrification on a failed save, petrification is done in stages. This gives players more chances to react and for allies to intervene. It also creates tension, allows for dramatic rescues, and provides a "soft landing" for a failed save. It also means a single unlucky roll doesn't immediately sideline a player.
		- **Restrained** - When a creature is targeted by a petrifying effect and fails its 1st saving throw, it doesn't immediately turn to stone. Instead, it becomes ***Restrained*** and can be healed magically normally (which ends the petrification) but if not healed must make another saving throw at the end of the next turn. On a successful save, the condition also ends. 
		- **Brittle** - On a failed 2nd save, the creature moves to the next stage of petrification, ***Vulnerability to Bludgeoning*** damage as they become brittle. At this point, a ***Remove Curse*** is required to stop the progression and restore the character. If not restored, another save is rolled at the end of the next turn, with a successful save returning to ***Restrained*** as they fight off the petrification process and a failure moving on to the next phase.
		- **Stone** - After 3 save failures, they become fully petrified stone and must be restored by ***Greater Restoration*** or an alternative cure (see below). 
	- **Alternative & Temporary Cures (House Rule)** - On a successful ***Intelligence (Arcana)***, ***Intelligence (Nature)***, or ***Intelligence (Religion)*** check (depending on the source), it may be determined that there are alchemical solutions, specific monster fluids (e.g., basilisk stomach acid or gorgon's blood), or unique rituals that can temporarily or permanently reverse petrification. Temporary cures allow the PC to return to normal for a short duration (usually 1d4 hours), after which they revert to stone. This provides a window for them to help find a permanent cure or complete a critical task. It normally requires cheaper components. Alternatively, it may require a quest-based cure for permanent resolution. The party needs to journey to a specific location, defeat a specific creature, or find a rare ingredient (ex. heart of a slain medusa).

### Downtime Use

Between adventures, the DM might ask you what your character is doing during his or her downtime. Periods
of downtime can vary in duration, but each downtime activity requires a certain number of days to complete before you gain any benefit, and at least 8 hours of each day must be spent on the downtime activity for the day to count. The days do not need to be consecutive. If you have more than the minimum amount of days to spend, you can keep doing the same thing for a longer period of time, or switch to a new downtime activity. Downtime activities other than the ones presented below are possible. If you want your character to spend his or her downtime performing an activity not covered
here, discuss it with the DM.

- **Non-Magical Crafting (PHB, p. 187)** - You can craft nonmagical objects, including adventuring equipment and works of art. You must be proficient with tools related to the object you are trying to create (typically artisan’s tools). You might also need access to special materials or locations necessary to create it. For example, someone proficient with smith’s tools needs a forge in order to craft a sword or suit of armor. For every day of downtime you spend crafting, you can craft one or more items with a total market value not exceeding 5 gold, and you must expend raw materials worth half the total market value. If something you want to craft has a market value greater than 5 gold, you make progress every day in 5 gold increments until you reach the market value of the item. Multiple characters can combine their efforts toward the crafting of a single item, provided that the characters all have proficiency with the requisite tools and are working together in the same place. Each character contributes 5 gold worth of effort for every day spent helping to craft the item.
- **Recuperating (PHB, p. 187)** - You can use downtime between adventures to recover from a debilitating injury, disease, or poison. After three days of downtime spent recuperating, you can make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, you can choose one of the following results:
	- End one effect on you that prevents you from regaining hit points.
	- For the next 24 hours, gain advantage on saving throws against one disease or poison currently affecting you.
- **Researching (PHB, p. 187)** - The time between adventures is a great chance to perform research, gaining insight into mysteries that have unfurled over the course of the campaign. Research can include poring over dusty tomes and crumbling scrolls in a library or buying drinks for the locals to pry rumors and gossip from their lips. When you begin your research, the DM determines whether the information is available, how many days of downtime it w ill take to find it, and whether there are any restrictions on your research (such as needing to seek out a specific individual, tome, or location). The DM might also require you to make one or more ability checks, such as an ***Intelligence (Investigation)*** check to find clues pointing toward the information you seek, or a ***Charisma (Persuasion)*** check to secure someone’s aid. Once those conditions are met, you learn the information if it is available. For each day of research, you must spend 1 gold to cover your expenses.
- **Training (PHB, p. 187)** - You can spend time between adventures learning a new language or training with a set of tools. Your DM might allow additional training options. First, you must find an instructor willing to teach you. The DM determines how long it takes, and whether one or more ability checks are required. The training lasts for 250 days and costs 1 gold per day. After you spend the requisite amount of time and money, you learn the new language or gain proficiency with the new tool.
- **Build Stronghold (DMG, p. 128)** - A character can spend time between adventures building a stronghold. Before work can begin, the character must acquire a plot of land. If the estate lies within a kingdom or similar domain, the character may need a royal charter (a legal document granting permission to oversee the estate in the name of the crown), a land grant (a legal document bequeathing custody of the land to the character for as long as he or she remains loyal to the crown), or a deed (a legal document that serves as proof of ownership). Land can also be acquired by inheritance or other means. Follow the normal rules for stronghold construction, however expect that some role-play may be required to get the process started, as well as significant expense and maintenance costs.
- **Carousing (DMG, p. 128)** - Characters can spend their downtime engaged in a variety of hedonistic activities such as attending parties, binge drinking, gambling, or anything else that helps them cope with the perils they face on their adventures. A carousing character spends money as though maintaining a wealthy lifestyle. At the end of the period spent carousing, the player rolls percentile dice and adds the character's level, then compares the total to the Carousing table to determine what happens to the character. Please note that getting out of the Carousing results may have role-play implications.
- **Magical Crafting (DMG, p. 129)** - The creation of a magic item is a lengthy, expensive task. To start, a character must have a formula that describes the construction of the item. It may also require rare components or materials. The character must also be a spellcaster with spell slots and must be able to cast any spells that the item can produce. Moreover, the character must meet a level minimum determined by the item's rarity, as shown in the Crafting Magic Items table. When trying to create magic items, the player will need to work with the DM to determine what is required.
- **Gaining Renown (DMG, p. 129)** - A character can spend downtime improving his or her ***Renown*** within an organization. Between adventures, a character undertakes minor tasks for the organization and socializes with its members. After pursuing these activities for a combined number of days equal to his or her current renown multiplied by 10, the character's renown increases by 1.
- **Sacred Rites (DMG, p. 129)** - A pious character can spend time between adventures performing sacred rites in a temple affiliated with a god he or she reveres. Between rites, the character spends time in meditation and prayer. A character who is a priest in the temple can lead these rites, which might include weddings, funerals, and ordinations. A layperson can offer sacrifices in a temple or assist a priest with a rite. A character who spends at least 10 days performing sacred rites gains inspiration at the start of each day for the next 2d6 days, if they do not already have it.
- **Running A Business (DMG, p. 129)** - Adventurers can end up owning businesses that have nothing to do with delving into dungeons or saving the world. A character might inherit a smithy, or the party might be given a parcel of farmland or a tavern as a reward. If they hold on to the business, they might feel obliged to spend time between adventures maintaining the venture and making sure it runs smoothly. Running a business is a complex activity, and the player will need to work with the DM to determine the outcome.
- **Selling Items (DMG, p. 129)** - Few people ca n afford to buy expensive or magical items, and fewer still know how to find one. Adventurers are exceptional in this regard due to the nature of their profession. A character who comes into possession of an expensive item or common, uncommon, rare, or very rare magic item that he or she wants to sell can spend downtime searching for a buyer. This downtime activity can be performed only in a city or another location where one can find wealthy buyers. Legendary and priceless artifacts cannot be sold during downtime and must be role-played.
- **Sowing Rumors (DMG, p. 131)** - Swaying public opinion can be an effective way to bring down a villain or elevate a friend. Spreading rumors is an efficient, if underhanded, way to accomplish that goal. Well-placed rumors can increase the subject's standing in a community or embroil someone in scandal. A rumor needs to be simple, concrete, and hard to disprove. An effective rumor also has to be believable, playing off what people want to believe about the person in question. Work with the DM to determine how long must be spent to sow rumors and what the outcome may be. This may result in role-playing opportunities, as well.

### Optional Rules Not In Use

We ***WILL NOT*** use the following optional rules:

- **Luck Points (PHB, p. 125 Option)** - Players can choose to use **Luck Points** to reroll a failed roll or force an opponent to reroll a successful one. This adds a layer of decision-making and can influence game outcomes.
- **Plot Points (DMG, p. 269 Option)** - Players earn plot points that they can spend to influence the story in minor ways, such as introducing a helpful NPC or a piece of useful information. I **DO NOT** use the optional plot point system.
- **Hero Points (DMG, p. 264 Option)** - Players earn hero points and can spend them to gain advantage on an attack roll, ability check, or saving throw, or to avoid death.
- **Facing Rules (DMG, p. 252 Option)** - Limits actions in arcs.
- **Diagonal Movement (DMG, p. 252 Option)** - Alternate method for counting distance that is more accurate over longer ranges.
- **Proficiency Dice (DMG, p. 263 Option)** - Instead of adding a flat proficiency bonus, characters roll a proficiency die (starting as a d4 and increasing with level) and add the result to ability checks, saving throws, and attack rolls they are proficient in.
- **Honor and Sanity (DMG, p. 264 Option)** - These are presented as additional ability scores that track a character's commitment to a code of conduct (Honor) and their mental fortitude (Sanity). They can be used for checks and saving throws.
- **Fear and Horror (DMG, p. 266 Option)** - Rules for handling frightening and horrifying situations, including fear checks and escalating levels of fear and horror.
- **Madness (DMG, p. 258 Option)** - Detailed rules for short-term, long-term, and indefinite madness effects on characters, often triggered by exposure to terrifying or alien phenomena.
- **Morale (DMG, p. 273 Option)** - Rules that determine when creatures might break and flee combat based on factors like casualties and the fate of their leader.
- **Epic Heroism (DMG, p. 267)** - A short rest is 5 minutes, and a long rest is 1 hour.
- **Gritty Realism (DMG, p. 267)** - A short rest is 8 hours, and a long rest is 7 days.
- **Massive Damage (DMG, p. 273)** - If a creature takes damage from a single source equal to or greater than half its hit point maximum, it might suffer a system shock, determined by a d10 roll with various debilitating effects.
- **Slow Natural Healing (DMG, p. 267)** - Characters don't regain any hit points at the end of a long rest. Instead, a character can spend Hit Dice at the end of a long rest, as they would during a short rest.
- **Firearms (DMG, p. 267)** - Rules for adding guns.
- **Explosives (DMG, p. 267)**: Rules for bombs and explosives.
- **Mark Action (DMG, p. 271 Option)** -  Marks a creature for attack.
- **Skill Variants (DMG, p. 263 Option)** - Different ways to handle skills or backgrounds with skill variants.
- **Spell Points (DMG, p. 288 Option)**: This rule replaces the spell slot system with a system where characters have a pool of spell points, and they can spend these points to cast any spell they know, with more powerful spells costing more points.
- **Shared Campaigns (XGtE, p. 175 Option)** - Rules for multiple DMs/campaigns
